VSO CSI driver documentation (#691)
hashicorp/web-unified-docs: content/vault/v1.20.x/content/docs/deploy/kubernetes/vso/csi/index.mdx

---
layout: docs

> page_title: Direct secrets

Reviewer: Is this the new name?

description: >-
  Mount secrets from Vault directly into application containers with the Vault
  Secrets Operator CSI driver.
---

# Direct secrets

@include 'alerts/enterprise-only.mdx'

While the Vault Secrets Operator lets you store Vault secrets in clusters as native

> Kubernetes Secrets, you can also use the "direct secrets" feature to mount Vault secrets directly to containers as volumes.

Reviewer: might be good to link out the to the K8s `Volumes` docs somewhere.

> Kubernetes Secrets, you can also use the "direct secrets" feature to mount Vault secrets directly to containers as volumes.

Reviewer: Can we explicitly call out that this new feature relies on the Kubernetes CSI and is implemented a CSI driver?

Author: I do so in the next line after this, including a link to the k8s CSI docs. After this first "transition" paragraph which I added to help connect the dots for HashiConf keynote viewers, the rest of the docs discuss it as a CSI driver.

Reviewer: :+1:

The direct secrets feature installs the Vault Secrets
Operator [CSI](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md) driver, which hooks into the pod volume lifecycle directly,
bypassing Kubernetes Secrets.

The Vault Secrets Operator CSI driver supports:
- Syncing multiple secrets from multiple plugins. Supported plugins include:
  - [Key/Value v1](/vault/docs/secrets/kv/kv-v1)
  - [Key/Value v2](/vault/docs/secrets/kv/kv-v2)
- Automatic generation and mounting of response-wrapped AppRole secret IDs as a
  [trusted orchestrator](/vault/tutorials/app-integration/secure-introduction?in=vault%2Fapp-integration#trusted-orchestrator) for authentication between application pods and Vault.
- Helm-based [installation](/vault/docs/platform/k8s/vso/installation).
- [Secret data transformation](/vault/docs/platform/k8s/vso/secret-transformation).

> The Vault Secrets Operator CSI Driver currently does not support the [instant updates](/vault/docs/deploy/kubernetes/vso/sources/vault/instant-updates) feature. 

Reviewer: Worth calling out that generically KV secret updates are provisioned on as new Pods come online, or whenever a matching container crashes/exists

Application containers must self-restart to receive updated secret information after a secret is updated in Vault.

## Secrets flow: Traditional VSO vs CSI driver

In the traditional workflow, the Vault Secrets Operator caches Vault secrets as Kubernetes Secrets, which are stored in etcd. 

> The Vault Secrets Operator watches for changes to custom resources such as [VaultStaticSecret](/vault/docs/platform/k8s/vso/api-reference#vaultstaticsecret) or [VaultDynamicSecret](/vault/docs/platform/k8s/vso/api-reference#vaultdynamicsecret). 

Reviewer: Can you use/extend the common-links.mdx for references to the VSO API.

When the resource definition changes, Vault Secrets Operator overwrites secret data in the associated Kubernetes Secret with the new information.

[![Diagram showing a secret flowing from Vault, through VSO, into the associated Kubernetes Secrets objects across all nodes in an app namespace](/img/vso_secrets_flow.png)](/img/vso_secrets_flow.png)

In the CSI driver workflow, the driver does not cache secrets as Kubernetes Secrets, so there is no storage in `etcd`.
The driver watches for changes to a custom resource (CR) called `CSISecrets`. The
[CSISecrets](/vault/docs/deploy/kubernetes/vso/api-reference#csisecrets) resource
contains a declarative list of secrets to fetch and an access control
configuration that only allows the designated pods to mount those secrets.

> When the spec of an approved pod references the `CSISecrets` resource as a volume to mount, the Vault Secrets Operator CSI driver populates 

Reviewer: typically Pod is capitalized.

that volume with the associated secrets for all referencing containers in the pod.

The pod starts up with all of the secrets from the `CSISecrets` resource mounted

> at the configured path (for example, `/var/run/csi-secrets`) as individual files.

Reviewer: It might be good to call out how these volumes are configured.

---
layout: docs
page_title: Direct secrets
description: >-
  Mount secrets from Vault directly into application containers with the Vault
  Secrets Operator CSI driver.
---

# Direct secrets

@include 'alerts/enterprise-only.mdx'

While the Vault Secrets Operator lets you store Vault secrets in clusters as native

> Kubernetes Secrets, you can also use the "direct secrets" feature to mount Vault secrets directly to containers as [volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/).

Reviewer: nit: can we call these "ephemeral volumes" throughout. They are defined as such in the `CSIDriver` resource that ships with the chart.

The direct secrets feature installs the Vault Secrets
Operator [CSI](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md) driver, which hooks into the Pod volume lifecycle directly,

> bypassing Kubernetes Secrets.

Reviewer: I wonder if we could replace the "bypass" part with something like "secret data from Vault is stored in ephemeral Kubernetes Volumes" or something to that effect?

---
layout: docs

> page_title: Direct secrets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
page_title: Use direct secrets in Kubernetes
```
Style correction: docs titles should not be features names. Instead, they should use direct language to indicate whether the information is conceptual or instructional.

description: >-
  Mount secrets from Vault directly into application containers with the Vault
  Secrets Operator CSI driver.
---

> # Direct secrets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Use direct secrets in Kubernetes with CSI
```

@include 'alerts/enterprise-only.mdx'

> The direct secrets feature is in **public beta**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@include 'alerts/beta.mdx'
```

> While the Vault Secrets Operator lets you store Vault secrets in clusters as native
> Kubernetes Secrets, you can also use the "direct secrets" feature to mount Vault secrets directly to containers as Kubernetes [ephemeral volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/ephemeral-volumes/).
> 
> The direct secrets feature installs the Vault Secrets
> Operator [CSI](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md) driver. 
> The CSI driver hooks into the Pod volume lifecycle, allowing applications to store secret data from Vault in ephemeral volumes with the same lifecycle as the application Pod itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the Vault Secrets Operator lets you store Vault secrets in clusters as
native Kubernetes Secrets, you must install the Vault Secrets Operator
[CSI driver](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md)
to use "direct secrets" functionality. 

The CSI driver hooks into the Pod volume lifecycle so applications can store
secret data from Vault in
[ephemeral volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/ephemeral-volumes/)
with the same lifecycle as the application Pod itself.
```

Style correction: write in active voice, focus on the job to be done and the tools involved not features

Unless there's a button in Vault that installs and deploys the driver for you 
(which is not what the previous docs implied), the feature does not install
anything. We're just calling the result of deploying the driver "direct secrets".

Author: Agreed. I've modified this to match what you're saying while also trying to keep the word "mount directly to containers" in there which I think Product cares about, to provide a definition for what "direct secrets" actually means. Hopefully what I've got there now satisfies both.

The Vault Secrets Operator CSI driver supports:
- Syncing multiple secrets from multiple plugins. Supported plugins include:
  - [Key/Value v1](/vault/docs/secrets/kv/kv-v1)
  - [Key/Value v2](/vault/docs/secrets/kv/kv-v2)
- Automatic generation and mounting of response-wrapped AppRole secret IDs as a
  [trusted orchestrator](/vault/tutorials/app-integration/secure-introduction?in=vault%2Fapp-integration#trusted-orchestrator) for authentication between application Pods and Vault.
- Helm-based [installation](/vault/docs/platform/k8s/vso/installation).
- [Secret data transformation](/vault/docs/platform/k8s/vso/secret-transformation).

> The Vault Secrets Operator CSI driver does not support the [instant updates](/vault/docs/deploy/kubernetes/vso/sources/vault/instant-updates) feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Vault Secrets Operator CSI driver does not support [instant updates for `VaultStaticSecrets`](/vault/docs/deploy/kubernetes/vso/sources/vault/instant-updates).
```

Author: VSO-CSI doesn't use the custom resource called VaultStaticSecrets so I'm just going to put Instant Updates here with the link, I think
